---
layout: post
title:  "Outline of a Poetry Generator"
---

I've been playing with a project around algorithmic poetry on and off for a few
years now. So far, I've justified a certain degree of laziness by making a
post-hoc point of not doing too much research on the topic. I'm afraid that
there's somebody with actual knowledge of poetry and/or programming has either
already done what I would hope to do or demonstrated some obstacle discouraging
enough to get the better of my minimal reserves of focus and willpower.

Despite my lack of research on the topic, I'm aware of a few precedents. I
know of the [cut-up technique](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjT1O0oPtxE), 
through William Burroughs. It goes more or less like this:

  1. slice up pages of text.
  2. rearrange the slices more or less at random.
  3. (In Burroughs' case) Come to prophetic realizations about the true and
     hidden significance of the original text(s).

Tristan Tzara's *How to Make a Dadaist Poem:* (1920) describes a similar
technique:

    Take a newspaper.  
    Take a pair of scissors.  
    Choose an article as long as you are planning to make your poem.
    Cut out the article.
    Then cut out each of the words that make up this article and put them in a bag.      Shake it gently.
    Then take out the scraps one after the other in the order in which they left the bag.  
    Copy conscientiously.
    The poem will be like you.
    And here are—an infinitely original author of charming sensibility, even though unappreciated by the vulgar herd.

Looking at *Vegetable Swallow*, another of Tzara's poems, we see that the
processes described is resonant but satirical:

    two smiles meet towards
    the child-wheel of my zeal
    the bloody baggage of creatures
    made flesh in physical legends-lives

    the nimble stags storms cloud over
    rain falls under the scissors of
    the dark hairdresser-furiously
    swimming under the clashing arpeggios

    in the machine's sap grass
    grows around with sharp eyes
    here the share of our caresses
    dead and departed with the waves

    gives itself up to the judgment of time
    parted by the meridian of hairs
    non strikes in our hands
    the spices of human pleasures

Let's compare this with a nonsense stanza produced by randomizing the same
words. If there isn't a hat or scissors on hand, we can do this with Ruby.
Where `p` is a string containing the text of the poem:
`p.split(/\s+/).shuffle.join(' ')`. Arranged into lines of reasonable length,
this yields stanzas like:

    strikes arpeggios with of hairdresser
    stags the under over scissors with
    share swimming made and dead flesh
    of sharp the creatures of itself grows 
    
    storms the to the non baggage hairs
    human gives meet bloody grass sap
    by the the hands physical our clashing
    departed waves spices of two the
    
We do get some evocative phrases (I particularly like "dead flesh of sharp
creatures") in the, but these are interspersed with syntactical non-starters
like "with of" and "the to the." Looking at *Vegetable Swallow*, by contrast,
we see phrases like "two smiles meet," and "the scissors of the dark
hairdresser" that show a degree of grammatical agreement and semantic coherence
that our random model will very rarely produce.

Though there are certainly syntactically tortured phrases in Tzara's original
("parted by the meridian of hairs/ non strikes in our hands,") we don't see any
examples of the jarring non-starters ("the to the") present in the randomly
generated text.

It only takes a little manipulation to stitch phrases from a random text into
something with all the appeal of refrigerator poetry:

    dark grass grows the cloud
    departed itself to meet the
    swimming caresses of pleasure share
    waves physical clashing of our sap

    the rain smiles bloody under
    storm's baggage dead in sharp
    with nimble scissors under
    hairs zeal by parted

bigrams = p.split(/\s+/).each_cons(2).to_a
bigrams.partition{ |v| p.index(v).even? }

[@pentametron](https://twitter.com/pentametron)
